documentation/competitions/Toothfairy2/readme.md, before:

Authors: \
Fabian Isensee*, Yannick Kirchhoff*, Lars Kraemer, Max Rokuss, Constantin Ulrich, Klaus H. Maier-Hein 

*: equal contribution

Author Affiliations:\
Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg \
Helmholtz Imaging

# Introduction

This document describes our submission to the [Toothfairy2 Challenge](https://toothfairy2.grand-challenge.org/toothfairy2/). 
Our model is essentially a nnU-Net ResEnc L with the patch size upscaled to 160x320x320 pixels. We disable left/right 
mirroring and train for 1500 instead of the standard 1000 epochs. Training was either done on 2xA100 40GB or one GH200 96GB.

# Dataset Conversion

# Experiment Planning and Preprocessing
Adapt and run the [dataset conversion script](../../../nnunetv2/dataset_conversion/Dataset119_ToothFairy2_All.py). 
This script just converts the mha files to nifti (smaller file size) and removes the unused label ids.

## Extract fingerprint:
`nnUNetv2_extract_fingerprint -d 119 -np 48`

## Run planning:
`nnUNetv2_plan_experiment -d 119 -pl nnUNetPlannerResEncL_torchres`

This planner not only uses the ResEncL configuration but also replaces the default resampling scheme with one that is 
faster (but less precise). Since all images in the challenge (train and test) should already have 0.3x0.3x0.3 spacing 
resampling is not required. This is just here as a safety measure. The speed is needed at inference time because grand 
challenge imposes a limit of 10 minutes per case.

## Edit the plans files
Add the following configuration to the generated plans file:

```json
        "3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2": {
            "inherits_from": "3d_fullres",
            "patch_size": [
                160,
                320,
                320
            ],
            "architecture": {
                "network_class_name": "dynamic_network_architectures.architectures.unet.ResidualEncoderUNet",
                "arch_kwargs": {
                    "n_stages": 7,
                    "features_per_stage": [
                        32,
                        64,
                        128,
                        256,
                        320,
                        320,
                        320
                    ],
                    "conv_op": "torch.nn.modules.conv.Conv3d",
                    "kernel_sizes": [
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ]
                    ],
                    "strides": [
                        [
                            1,
                            1,
                            1
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            1,
                            2,
                            2
                        ]
                    ],
                    "n_blocks_per_stage": [
                        1,
                        3,
                        4,
                        6,
                        6,
                        6,
                        6
                    ],
                    "n_conv_per_stage_decoder": [
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1
                    ],
                    "conv_bias": true,
                    "norm_op": "torch.nn.modules.instancenorm.InstanceNorm3d",
                    "norm_op_kwargs": {
                        "eps": 1e-05,
                        "affine": true
                    },
                    "dropout_op": null,
                    "dropout_op_kwargs": null,
                    "nonlin": "torch.nn.LeakyReLU",
                    "nonlin_kwargs": {
                        "inplace": true
                    }
                },
                "_kw_requires_import": [
                    "conv_op",
                    "norm_op",
                    "dropout_op",
                    "nonlin"
                ]
            }            
        }
```
Aside from changing the patch size this makes the architecture one stage deeper (one more pooling + res blocks), enabling
it to make effective use of the larger input

# Preprocessing
`nnUNetv2_preprocess -d 119 -c 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 -plans_name nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -np 48`

# Training
We train two models on all training cases:

```bash
nnUNetv2_train 119 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 all -p nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -tr nnUNetTrainer_onlyMirror01_1500ep
nnUNet_results=${nnUNet_results}_2 nnUNetv2_train 119 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 all -p nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -tr nnUNetTrainer_onlyMirror01_1500ep
```
Models are trained from scratch.

Note how in the second line we overwrite the nnUNet_results variable in order to be able to train the same model twice without overwriting the results

# Inference
We ensemble the two models from above. On a technical level we copy the two fold_all folders into one training output 
directory and rename them to fold_0 and fold_1. This lets us use nnU-Net's cross-validation ensembling strategy which 
is more computationally efficient (needed for time limit on grand-challenge.org).

Run inference with the [inference script](inference_script_semseg_only_customInf2.py)

# Postprocessing
If the prediction of a class on some test case is smaller than the corresponding cutoff size then it is removed 
(replaced with background).

Cutoff values were optimized using a five-fold cross-validation on the Toothfairy2 training data. We optimize HD95 and Dice separately. 
The final cutoff for each class is then the smaller value between the two metrics. You can find our volume cutoffs in the inference 
script as part of our `postprocess` function.

Commit message:

add hint about increasing number of processes used for dataloading

documentation/competitions/Toothfairy2/readme.md, after:

Authors: \
Fabian Isensee*, Yannick Kirchhoff*, Lars Kraemer, Max Rokuss, Constantin Ulrich, Klaus H. Maier-Hein 

*: equal contribution

Author Affiliations:\
Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg \
Helmholtz Imaging

# Introduction

This document describes our submission to the [Toothfairy2 Challenge](https://toothfairy2.grand-challenge.org/toothfairy2/). 
Our model is essentially a nnU-Net ResEnc L with the patch size upscaled to 160x320x320 pixels. We disable left/right 
mirroring and train for 1500 instead of the standard 1000 epochs. Training was either done on 2xA100 40GB or one GH200 96GB.

# Dataset Conversion

# Experiment Planning and Preprocessing
Adapt and run the [dataset conversion script](../../../nnunetv2/dataset_conversion/Dataset119_ToothFairy2_All.py). 
This script just converts the mha files to nifti (smaller file size) and removes the unused label ids.

## Extract fingerprint:
`nnUNetv2_extract_fingerprint -d 119 -np 48`

## Run planning:
`nnUNetv2_plan_experiment -d 119 -pl nnUNetPlannerResEncL_torchres`

This planner not only uses the ResEncL configuration but also replaces the default resampling scheme with one that is 
faster (but less precise). Since all images in the challenge (train and test) should already have 0.3x0.3x0.3 spacing 
resampling is not required. This is just here as a safety measure. The speed is needed at inference time because grand 
challenge imposes a limit of 10 minutes per case.

## Edit the plans files
Add the following configuration to the generated plans file:

```json
        "3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2": {
            "inherits_from": "3d_fullres",
            "patch_size": [
                160,
                320,
                320
            ],
            "architecture": {
                "network_class_name": "dynamic_network_architectures.architectures.unet.ResidualEncoderUNet",
                "arch_kwargs": {
                    "n_stages": 7,
                    "features_per_stage": [
                        32,
                        64,
                        128,
                        256,
                        320,
                        320,
                        320
                    ],
                    "conv_op": "torch.nn.modules.conv.Conv3d",
                    "kernel_sizes": [
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ],
                        [
                            3,
                            3,
                            3
                        ]
                    ],
                    "strides": [
                        [
                            1,
                            1,
                            1
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            2,
                            2,
                            2
                        ],
                        [
                            1,
                            2,
                            2
                        ]
                    ],
                    "n_blocks_per_stage": [
                        1,
                        3,
                        4,
                        6,
                        6,
                        6,
                        6
                    ],
                    "n_conv_per_stage_decoder": [
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1,
                        1
                    ],
                    "conv_bias": true,
                    "norm_op": "torch.nn.modules.instancenorm.InstanceNorm3d",
                    "norm_op_kwargs": {
                        "eps": 1e-05,
                        "affine": true
                    },
                    "dropout_op": null,
                    "dropout_op_kwargs": null,
                    "nonlin": "torch.nn.LeakyReLU",
                    "nonlin_kwargs": {
                        "inplace": true
                    }
                },
                "_kw_requires_import": [
                    "conv_op",
                    "norm_op",
                    "dropout_op",
                    "nonlin"
                ]
            }            
        }
```
Aside from changing the patch size this makes the architecture one stage deeper (one more pooling + res blocks), enabling
it to make effective use of the larger input

# Preprocessing
`nnUNetv2_preprocess -d 119 -c 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 -plans_name nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -np 48`

# Training
We train two models on all training cases:

```bash
nnUNetv2_train 119 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 all -p nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -tr nnUNetTrainer_onlyMirror01_1500ep
nnUNet_results=${nnUNet_results}_2 nnUNetv2_train 119 3d_fullres_torchres_ps160x320x320_bs2 all -p nnUNetResEncUNetLPlans -tr nnUNetTrainer_onlyMirror01_1500ep
```
Models are trained from scratch.

Note how in the second line we overwrite the nnUNet_results variable in order to be able to train the same model twice without overwriting the results

We recommend to increase the number of processes used for data augmentation. Otherwise you can run into CPU bottlenecks.
Use `export nnUNet_n_proc_DA=32` or higher (if your system permits!).

# Inference
We ensemble the two models from above. On a technical level we copy the two fold_all folders into one training output 
directory and rename them to fold_0 and fold_1. This lets us use nnU-Net's cross-validation ensembling strategy which 
is more computationally efficient (needed for time limit on grand-challenge.org).

Run inference with the [inference script](inference_script_semseg_only_customInf2.py)

# Postprocessing
If the prediction of a class on some test case is smaller than the corresponding cutoff size then it is removed 
(replaced with background).

Cutoff values were optimized using a five-fold cross-validation on the Toothfairy2 training data. We optimize HD95 and Dice separately. 
The final cutoff for each class is then the smaller value between the two metrics. You can find our volume cutoffs in the inference 
script as part of our `postprocess` function.
